#summary Introduction to Google Mock and Its Documentation
#labels Featured

Welcome to Google C++ Mocking Framework!

Inspired by [http://www.jmock.org/ jMock], [http://www.easymock.org/ EasyMock],
and [http://code.google.com/p/hamcrest/ Hamcrest], *Google
C++ Mocking Framework* (or *Google Mock* for short) is a library for
writing and using C++ mock classes.  We have enjoyed it in many
projects at Google, and hope you find it useful too.

== System Requirements ==

Google Mock is not a testing framework itself.  Instead, it needs a
testing framework for writing tests.  Currently Google Mock only works
with [http://code.google.com/p/googletest/ Google Test], although
eventually we plan to support other C++ testing frameworks.  Google
Mock comes with a copy of Google Test bundled, or you can use a
compatible version that you have already installed.

Google Mock depends on advanced C++ features and thus requires a more
modern compiler.  It has been tested with *gcc 4.0+* on *Linux* and
*Mac OS X*, and *Microsoft Visual C++ 8.0 SP1* on *Windows*.

To use Google Mock, you also need the
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technical_Report_1 tr1] C++ library (in
particular, `<tr1/tuple>`) installed.  This library comes with gcc
4.0+.  If you use Microsoft Visual C++ and `tr1` is not included, you
can download it for free
[http://www.microsoft.com/downloads/details.aspx?FamilyId=D466226B-8DAB-445F-A7B4-448B326C48E7 here].
Another option is to install the [http://www.boost.org/ boost] C++
libraries, which contain an implementation of `tr1` (we haven't tested
this configuration though.).

== Getting Started ==

If you are new to the project, we suggest to read the user
documentation in the following order:

  * Learn the [http://code.google.com/p/googletest/wiki/GoogleTestPrimer basics] of Google Test, which is currently required by Google Mock.
  * Read [ForDummies Google Mock for Dummies].
  * Read the instructions on how to [http://code.google.com/p/googlemock/source/browse/#svn/trunk/README build Google Mock].

Once you understand the basics, check out the rest of the docs:

  * CheatSheet - all the commonly used stuff at a glance.
  * CookBook - recipes for getting things done, including advanced techniques.

If you have problems, please check the FrequentlyAskedQuestions before
posting a question on the [http://groups.google.com/group/googlemock googlemock]
discussion group.

If you want to contribute to the development of Google Mock, please
read the DevGuide.

Happy mocking!